JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Commuting her sentence was
entirely appropriate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his final news
conference,
President Obama addresses the
controversial
decision to release Chelsea
Manning and his
role in a new era of politics.
Then: The Senate takes on a
whirlwind of confirmation
hearings, grilling the
president-elect's picks
for the next Cabinet.
And building a greener form of
energy -- how
progress on fusion nuclear
technology could
be the future of our power.
MICHL BINDERBAUER, CTO, Tri
Alpha Energy:
Our great-great-great-grandkids
are going
to live in a world powered by
fusion almost
exclusively.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: He has given his
final major
speech, and now President Obama
has also held
his final news conference.
He spent an hour before the
White House press
corps today, two days before his
presidency
ends.
John Yang was there.
JOHN YANG: In his 22nd and final
time facing
reporters in the White House
Briefing Room,
President Obama today defended
his decision
to commute the sentence of
Chelsea Manning,
the former Army intelligence
analyst convicted
of leaking U.S. military and
diplomatic secrets.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Chelsea Manning has served a
tough prison
sentence.
So, the notion that the average
person who
was thinking about disclosing
vital classified
information would think that it
goes unpunished,
I don't think would get that
impression from
the sentence that Chelsea
Manning has served.
JOHN YANG: Most of the news
conference was
spent looking ahead to the fate
of his own
accomplishments after
president-elect Trump
takes office.
BARACK OBAMA: My working
assumption is that,
having won an election, opposed
a number of
my initiatives and some aspects
of my vision
for where the country needs to
go, it's appropriate
for him to go forward with his
vision and
his values.
And I don't expect that there's
going to be,
you know, enormous overlap.
JOHN YANG: He also shed light on
the counsel
he's offered Mr. Trump.
BARACK OBAMA: This is a job of
such magnitude,
that you can't do it by
yourself.
You are enormously reliant on a
team, your
Cabinet, your senior White House
staff, all
the way to fairly junior folks
in their 20s
and 30s, but who are executing
on significant
responsibilities.
That's probably the most useful
advice and
most constructive advice that I
have been
able to give him.
JOHN YANG: He said he hoped he
could take
a pause from politics, but made
clear he will
speak out when he feels
compelled to.
BARACK OBAMA: Certain moments
where I think
our core values may be at stake.
I put in that category if I saw
systematic
discrimination being ratified in
some fashion.
Efforts to round up kids who
have grown up
here and, for all practical
purposes, are
American kids, and send them
someplace else,
I think, would be something that
would merit
me speaking out.
JOHN YANG: And he weighed in one
last time
on an issue that has dogged
presidents for
generations, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
BARACK OBAMA: If you do not have
two states,
then, in some form or fashion,
you are extending
an occupation.
We have believed, consistent
with the positions
that have been taken with
previous U.S. administrations
for decades now, that it was
important for
us to send a signal, a wakeup
call, that this
moment may be passing.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Obama also
reflected on how
America has changed during his
presidency,
on social issues, like attitudes
on LGBTQ
rights.
BARACK OBAMA: I don't think it
is something
that will be reversible, because
American
society has changed.
The attitudes of young people in
particular
have changed.
That doesn't mean there aren't
going to be
some fights that are important,
legal issues,
issues surrounding transgender
persons.
There are still going to be some
battles that
need to take place.
JOHN YANG: The president
lamented what he
sees as undue restrictions on
voting rights,
which he said was a lingering
vestige of slavery
and Jim Crow.
BARACK OBAMA: This whole notion
of election
or voting fraud, this is
something that has
constantly been disproved.
This is fake news, the notion
that there are
a whole bunch of people out
there who are
going out there and are not
eligible to vote
and want to vote.
We have the opposite problem.
We have a whole bunch of people
who are eligible
to vote who don't vote.
JOHN YANG: As Mr. Obama, the
nation's first
black president, prepares to
leave office,
after the first female
presidential nominee
was defeated, he expressed
confidence that
more barriers will be broken in
the future.
BARACK OBAMA: If, in fact, we
continue to
keep opportunity open to
everybody, then,
yes, we're going to have a woman
president,
we're going to have a Latino
president, we
will have a Jewish president, a
Hindu president.
You know what?
Who knows who we're going to
have.
I suspect we will have a whole
bunch of mixed-up
presidents at some point that
nobody really
knows what to call them.
JOHN YANG: Once he becomes a
former president,
Mr. Obama says he is looking
forward to writing,
being what he called quiet.
He said he doesn't want to hear
himself talk
quite so much in the future, and
also being
a consumer of news, rather than
the subject
of news -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John, I also
thought it was
interesting that the president
acknowledged
the role that economic
inequality played in
the results of the election.
JOHN YANG: That's exactly right.
He spoke about that in the
context of a question
about inclusion and diversity.
He said it's important for all
Americans to
feel a part of the growing
economy.
He said he thought there were a
lot of people
who voted for Mr. Trump because
they felt
forgotten and disenfranchised
and looked down
upon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John, you
had a busy day,
because I know, before the
president's news
conference, you were -- you
attended a briefing
by the Trump transition team,
and they were
talking about getting ready for
the inauguration.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
Sean Spicer, who is going to be
the press
secretary here at the White
House on Friday,
starting on Friday, said that
Mr. Trump has
been rehearsing his inaugural
address.
He said that he wrote it himself
with some
input from policy adviser
Stephen Miller,
from Kellyanne Conway, from
Reince Priebus,
who's going to be White House
chief of staff,
from Steve Bannon, who's going
to be White
House counsel -- counselor,
rather.
He said that it's going to talk
about common
goals that -- and Mr. Trump
himself said that
the theme is going to be America
first.
Sean was asked -- Sean Spicer
was asked if
any part of the speech is going
to reach out
to Americans who didn't vote for
Mr. Trump.
He said that Mr. Trump doesn't
feel he should
be judged on his rhetoric or
symbolism, but
wants to be judged on his
actions and his
successes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All really
interesting.
John Yang, keep holding down the
fort for
us at the White House and with
the Trump transition
team.
Thank you.
Well, this was a day for team
Trump also to
talk health and environment at
two Senate
hearings.
The health secretary-designate,
Tom Price,
defended his investments in
medical stocks
and played down talk of
overhauling Medicare.
And Scott Pruitt, nominated to
run to run
the Environmental Protection
Agency, said
that he doesn't believe climate
change is
a hoax, as the president-elect
has suggested.
We will have full reports on all
that after
the news summary.
Regarding climate change, there
is news that
global temperatures hit a record
high in 2016,
for the third straight year.
The data is from NASA, the
National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration
and the British.
They say the average last year
was more than
1.5 degrees higher than in the
mid-20th century.
They say it was caused by
manmade greenhouse
gases and an El Nino event.
The nominee to be U.N.
ambassador says Russia
committed war crimes in Syria
and cannot be
trusted.
South Carolina Governor Nikki
Haley offered
a harsher assessment today than
Mr. Trump
has at her own Senate hearing.
GOV.
NIKKI HALEY (R), South Carolina:
Russia is
trying to show their muscle
right now.
It is what they do.
And I think we always have to be
cautious.
I don't think that we can trust
them.
I think that we have to make
sure that we
try and see what we can get from
them before
we give to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Haley also
blasted a U.N. resolution
last month that condemned
Israeli settlements,
and she voiced support for
moving the U.S.
Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem.
Meanwhile, the nominee to run
the Commerce
Department, Wilbur Ross, put
China on notice
today.
The billionaire investor told
his confirmation
hearing that the Chinese are --
quote -- "the
most protectionist country among
the major
economies."
WILBUR ROSS, Commerce Secretary
Nominee: They
have both very high tariff
barriers and very
high non-tariff trade barriers
to commerce.
So, they talk much more about
free trade than
they actually practice.
We would like to levelize that
playing field
and bring the realities a bit
closer to the
rhetoric.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ross also said
the Trump administration
will focus on renegotiating the
North Atlantic
Free Trade Agreement very early
on.
Separately, the Senate Armed
Services Committee
easily approved the nomination
of James Mattis
for defense secretary.
It goes now to the full Senate.
In West Africa, a suicide
attacker drove a
car bomb into a camp in Northern
Mali, killing
at least 60 people and wounding
115.
The attack struck a base in the
city of Gao,
where soldiers and former rebels
are trying
to enforce a 2015 peace treaty.
Later, an Islamist group linked
to al-Qaida
claimed responsibility.
In Nigeria, the International
Red Cross now
says that at least 70 refugees
and aid workers
died Tuesday when the Nigerian
air force accidentally
bombed a U.N. camp.
Military officials say they
meant to hit the
militant Boko Haram group.
At least 46 severely wounded
people remained
at the camp today, near the
border with Cameroon.
U.N. officials have called for a
full investigation.
Iraqi government troops
announced today that
they have taken full control of
eastern half
of the city of Mosul.
The military said it drove
Islamic State militants
out of the last neighborhoods
after a three-month
operation.
Today, people cheered and took
pictures with
soldiers.
And commanders talked of the
coming operation
to liberate western Mosul.
LT.
GEN.
TALIB SHAGHATI, Iraqi Commander
(through translator):
In the last few days, our
forces' movements
became quicker and the clearing
of districts
became faster.
The reason is that, when they
were defeated,
they retreated.
I think the western side will be
easier to
liberate from the eastern side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Despite the
military's announcement,
there were reports of continued
fighting in
Mosul's eastern half.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Supreme Court
will decide whether barring
racially offensive
trademarks violates free speech.
The justices heard arguments
today over a
70-year-old law.
It is being challenged by an
Asian-American
band named The Slants.
The ultimate decision could also
affect the
National Football League's
Washington Redskins.
The U.S. Secret Service has
agreed to pay
$24 million to settle a
long-running racial
discrimination lawsuit.
More than 100 African-American
agents are
part of a suit filed back in
2000.
They say the agency group
routinely promoted
whites over qualified blacks.
Under the settlement, the Secret
Service doesn't
admit any wrongdoing.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones
industrial average
lost 22 points to close at
19804.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 17
points, and the
S&P 500 added four.
And former President George H.W.
Bush and
his wife, Barbara, are both
hospitalized in
Houston this evening.
Mr. Bush was admitted Saturday
with pneumonia,
and he moved into the intensive
care unit
today.
A spokesman says he's stable.
Mrs. Bush entered the same
hospital today,
as a precaution, they said, for
fatigue and
coughing.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
several Trump
Cabinet nominees face tough
questioning at
their confirmation hearings; the
exciting,
yet elusive possibilities of
nuclear fusion;
and much more.
We turn now to the confirmation
hearings for
the president-elect's Cabinet.
One of Mr. Trump's most repeated
pledges is
to repeal and replace Obamacare,
officially
known as the Affordable Care
Act.
His nominee to head the Health
and Human Services
Department, Representative Tom
Price, faced
aggressive questioning today
when he appeared
before the Senate Committee on
Health, Education,
Labor and Pensions.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: When Tom Price,
doctor, congressman
and hopeful health secretary,
today faced
the Senate Health Committee, the
spotlight
fell equally on the fate of the
Affordable
Care Act he wants to repeal and
on Price's
own history.
Senator Patty Murray launched a
Democratic
theme.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY (D), Washington:
You purchased
stock in Innate
Immunotherapeutics, a company
working to develop new drugs, on
four separate
occasions between January 2015
and August
2016.
You made the decision to
purchase that stock,
not a broker, yes or no?
REP.
TOM PRICE (R-GA), Health and
Human Services
Secretary Nominee: That is a
decision that
I made, yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: Price stressed
that other
health stocks he owned were
chosen by his
broker.
The questions arise from his
financial disclosures,
showing Price invested in
health-related companies
in the past two years, as he
pushed legislation
in Congress that benefited those
companies.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY: Your purchases
occurred while
the 21st Century Cures Act,
which had several
provisions could that could
impact drug developers
like Innate Immunotherapeutics,
was being
negotiated, and, again, just
days before you
were notified to prepare for a
final vote
on the bill.
LISA DESJARDINS: Price insisted
those bills
were consistent with what he's
done for years,
and that while he did get a
private stock
offer, he had no special
knowledge of the
company.
REP.
TOM PRICE: I had no access to
non-public information.
LISA DESJARDINS: Minnesota
Senator Al Franken
pointed to a recent Wall Street
Journal report
finding that Price traded more
than $300,000
of health-related companies
while simultaneously
working on policy affecting
those companies.
SEN.
AL FRANKEN (D), Minnesota: These
sound like
sweetheart deals, and I think
that our job
in this body and in Congress and
in government
is to avoid the appearance of
conflict.
And, boy, you have not done --
done this.
LISA DESJARDINS: The exchanges
moved from
calm to tense.
Price pushed back, insisting he
would never
use his office for financial
gain.
REP.
TOM PRICE: What I did was comply
with the
rules of the House in an ethical
and legal
and above-board manner and in a
transparent
way.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican
Orrin Hatch called
the Democratic push for an
investigation hypocrisy,
pointing out no rules in
Congress prevent
stock trades.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: In fact,
there are
members on this committee who
have -- as I
understand it, who have traded
individual
health stocks while serving on
this committee.
Now, this appears to be nothing
more than
a hypocritical attack on your
good character.
REP.
TOM PRICE: Thank you, sir.
Everything that we have done has
been above-board,
transparent, ethical and legal.
And, as you know, and the
members of this
committee know, there's an
organization that's
called the Office of Government
Ethics that
looks at all of -- for every
Cabinet nominee,
looks at all of the possessions,
all the holdings
and the like, and makes a
recommendation as
to what that Cabinet member must
do in order
to make certain that there's no
conflict of
interest.
The Office of Government Ethics
has looked
at our holdings and given advice
about what
would need to be done in terms
of divesting
from certain stock holdings.
LISA DESJARDINS: As part of the
nomination
ethics process, Price has
pledged to divest
from 43 companies, including
those the Democrats
raised, within 90 days of his
confirmation.
REP.
TOM PRICE: I think some of the
things that
have occurred with the passage
of the ACA
have improved certain areas.
The coverage is certainly
improved.
But the consequences of that, I
mean, that
many people, as I have mentioned
before, have
coverage, but they don't have
care.
I think that the more
involvement that patients
and families and doctors can
have in medical
decisions, the higher-quality
care we will
have.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Price, who
practiced
as an orthopedic surgeon for
more than two
decades, proposed his own
detailed plan last
year, offering some tax credits
and repealing
the Medicaid expansion.
To him, that means less
government interference,
but to Senator Elizabeth Warren,
a Democrat,
it means cuts to needy
populations.
REP.
TOM PRICE: What we believe is
appropriate
is to make certain that the
individuals receiving
the care are actually receiving
care.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts: I understand
why you think you're right to
cut it.
I'm just asking the question.
Did you propose to cut more than
a trillion
dollars out of Medicaid over the
next 10 years?
REP.
TOM PRICE: You have the numbers
before you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Price
insisted that a
Republican replacement plan
would ensure widespread
access to care.
REP.
TOM PRICE: My role in Congress
was to always
make certain that individuals
had the opportunity
to gain access to the kind of
coverage that
they that they desired and that
they had the
financial feasibility to do so.
LISA DESJARDINS: But access,
Senator Bernie
Sanders said, is not the same as
coverage.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont: I
have access
to buying a $10 million home.
I don't have the money to do
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Price next goes
before the
Senate Finance Committee on
Tuesday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scott Pruitt also
took his
turn in the hot seat today.
If confirmed, he would be the
new head of
the Environmental Protection
Agency, and the
president-elect has said he
wants him to reverse
eight years of what he calls of
President
Obama's environmental policies.
Democrats wanted to see just how
far he plans
to go.
Jeffrey Brown has that story.
JEFFREY BROWN: As the hearing
began, Democrats
focused on today's announcement
from NASA
scientists that the Earth had
seen record
temperatures for a third
straight year.
This exchange followed.
SEN.
EDWARD MARKEY (D),
Massachusetts: Donald Trump
has called global warming a hoax
caused by
the Chinese.
Do you agree that global warming
is a hoax?
SCOTT PRUITT (R), EPA
Administrator Nominee:
I do not, Senator.
SEN.
EDWARD MARKEY: So, Donald Trump
is wrong?
SCOTT PRUITT: I do not believe
that climate
change is a hoax.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, in his
opening statement,
Scott Pruitt had an important
caveat.
SCOTT PRUITT: Science tells us
that the climate
is changing and that human
activity in some
manner impacts that change.
The ability to measure with
precision the
degree and extent of that impact
and what
to do about it are subject to
continued debate
and dialogue, and well it should
be.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pruitt made clear
he does believe
strongly in states' rights, and
said he'd
work to return the federal
watchdog to what
he considers its proper role.
SCOTT PRUITT: Federalism
matters.
It matters because Congress says
so.
And because we need it to
achieve good outcomes
as a nation for air and water
quality, we
need the partnership of the
states to achieve
that.
It is our state regulators who
oftentimes
best understand the local needs
and the uniqueness
of our environmental challenges.
JEFFREY BROWN: As Oklahoma
attorney general,
Pruitt filed 14 lawsuits against
the EPA and
an array of Obama administration
environmental
rules.
And, in the past, he's said he
will work to
repeal the president's
centerpiece climate
regulation cutting carbon
emissions from power
plants.
Today, several Democrats raised
concerns over
the health ramifications.
SEN.
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND (D), New
York: We have
had children die in New York
City because
none of their teachers, no
administrators
in the schools knew what to do
when a child
has an asthma attack.
It's a huge problem.
So, I need you to care about
human health
and really believe that the cost
when human
health is at risk, when people
are dying is
far higher than it is the cost
to that polluter
to clean up the air and change
their processes.
I need you to feel it as if your
children
sitting behind you are the ones
in the emergency
room.
I need you to know it.
SCOTT PRUITT: And, Senator, I
would say to
you there are certain instances
where cost
can't even be considered, as you
know.
Those criteria pollutants under
our NAAQS
program, cost is not even a
factor, because
human health is the focus.
JEFFREY BROWN: Environmental
protesters interrupted
the proceedings several times.
One was forcibly removed into
the hallway.
At various points, some
Democrats showed their
irritation at what they saw as
Pruitt's vague
responses.
For their part, though,
Republicans praised
Pruitt for his work in Oklahoma,
including
his handling of a dispute
involving poultry
industry runoff into the
Illinois River.
Pruitt negotiated a deal and
ordered further
study, ending the legal fight.
Democrats pointed to campaign
contributions
Pruitt had received from poultry
company officials.
But Republicans focused on what
they see as
economic harm and bureaucratic
barriers raised
by the EPA.
Republican Senator Deb Fischer
of Nebraska:
SEN.
DEB FISCHER (R), Nebraska: As a
result of
the activist role the EPA has
played for the
past eight years, families are
concerned about
the futures of their livelihood.
What steps will you take as the
EPA administrator
to provide relief for American
families that
are faced truly with an
onslaught of EPA rules?
SCOTT PRUITT: Well, it's very
important that
that process be adhered to, to
give voice
to all Americans in balancing
the environmental
objectives we have, but also the
economic
harm that results.
And the Supreme Court has spoken
about that
rather consistently of late.
And I would seek to lead the EPA
in such a
way to ensure that openness and
transparency.
JEFFREY BROWN: Scott Pruitt is
expected to
confirmed by the full Senate,
with support
from all 51 Senate Republicans.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We also want to
follow up on
the confirmation hearing for the
president-elect's
pick for education secretary,
Betsy DeVos.
Last night, we told you about
some of her
ideas, but after our broadcast,
we learned
more, as her hearing continued
into the evening.
When pressed, she said she
wouldn't rule out
using public funds for private
schools.
She also seemed opposed to free
tuition for
community college.
She was asked about her
commitment to civil
rights for students who are
LGBTQ and past
contributions to groups that are
opposed to
same-sex marriage.
She also faced a tough exchange
from Democratic
Senator Chris Murphy of
Connecticut on whether
guns should be carried on
schools campuses.
SEN.
CHRIS MURPHY (D), Connecticut:
One final question:
Do you think that guns have any
place in or
around schools?
BETSY DEVOS, Education Secretary
Nominee:
I think that's best left to
locales and states
to decide.
If the underlying question is...
SEN.
CHRIS MURPHY: You can't say that
-- you can't
say definitively today that guns
shouldn't
be in schools?
BETSY DEVOS: Well, I will refer
back to Senator
Enzi and the school that he was
talking about
in Wapiti, Wyoming.
I think probably there, I would
imagine that
there's probably a gun in the
school to protect
from potential grizzlies.
SEN.
CHRIS MURPHY: If President Trump
moves forward
with his plan to ban gun-free
school zones,
will you support that proposal?
BETSY DEVOS: I will support what
the president-elect
does.
But, Senator, if the question is
around gun
violence and the results of
that, please know
that I -- my heart bleeds and is
broken for
those families that have lost
any individual
due to gun violence.
SEN.
CHRIS MURPHY: I look forward to
working with
you, but I also look forward to
you coming
to Connecticut and talking about
the role
of guns in schools.
JUDY WOODRUFF: DeVos was also
asked repeatedly
about how she would enforce the
disabilities
law for education.
At times, she didn't seem
certain about some
of the law's provisions.
Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, a
Democrat
and the former vice presidential
nominee,
led off this exchange.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D), Virginia: Should
all schools
that receive taxpayer funding be
required
to meet the requirements of the
Individuals
with Disabilities in Education
Act?
BETSY DEVOS: I think that's a
matter that's
best left to the states.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: So, states might --
some states
might be good to kids with
disabilities, and
other states might not be so
good, and then,
what, people could just move
around the country
if they don't like how their
kids are being
treated?
BETSY DEVOS: I think that's an
issue that
is best left to the states.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Let me state this.
I think all schools that receive
federal funding,
public, charter, or private,
should be required
to meet the conditions oft
Individuals With
Disabilities and Education Act.
Do you agree with me or not?
BETSY DEVOS: I think that's
certainly worth
discussion.
And I would look forward to...
SEN.
TIM KAINE: So, you cannot yet
agree with me?
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was at
DeVos' hearing
last night.
So, let's wrap up all of this
with a look
at where things stand for the
Trump Cabinet.
And, for that, we're joined once
again by
the "NewsHour"'s Lisa Desjardins
on Capitol
Hill.
So, Lisa, there is also news
today about president-elect
Trump's pick to be head of the
Office of Management
and Budget.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Someone not even with a hearing
today is making
the headlines.
That's Representative Mick
Mulvaney of South
Carolina.
We now know that Representative
Mulvaney in
the early 2000s failed to pay
taxes for one
of his household employees.
It was a baby-sitter, a child
care provider
for he and his wife's three
triplets at the
time.
Mulvaney disclosed this
information to the
Senate Budget Committee about a
month ago,
we are told.
And he has then paid some back
taxes, about
$15,000.
He's waiting for the bill from
his state as
well.
Of course, I don't need to tell
our viewers
this is significant, because
issues like this
have completely scuttled
nominations for others,
including also another former
member of Congress,
Tom Daschle, who was the nominee
for HHS secretary,
and also Zoe Baird, under
President Clinton,
who was the nominee for attorney
general.
We are not hearing anything yet
from Senate
Republicans.
Senate Democrats are going after
this very
strongly.
I did talk to Senator John
McCain, who is
the chairman of the Armed
Services Committee.
He told me he thinks this is
fairly serious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, one
other thing.
You were telling me earlier that
there are
some pretty serious negotiations
going on
right now between the Democratic
and the Republican
leaders in the Senate over the
order that
these nominees will have a
confirmation vote.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right,
and specifically
how many of these Cabinet
secretaries are
confirmed on day one.
We know that is something that
president-elect
Trump has been measuring.
And we know that he's been
looking at President
Obama's number, which was seven
confirmations
on day one.
Right now, Judy, it doesn't look
like he will
come close to that.
In fact, Democrats are
negotiating over whether
they will allow any nominees to
be confirmed
on day one.
They can hold up a nomination
over the course
of a single day or more.
And they're talking about the
doubts they
have and the problems they have
with what
they say the way these
confirmation hearings
have been rushed through.
Republicans say that's not fair,
and they
want the same treatment the
Obama nominees
received.
I think what's important to
watch for, Judy,
is especially the Defense on
Homeland Security
positions.
Those are the most important to
Republicans.
We will see if any of those are
confirmed
on day one.
Those are all -- all of that is
in the air
even just two days out from
inauguration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot to follow,
Lisa Desjardins.
LISA DESJARDINS: Correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
thanks very
much.
NARRATOR: January 20, 2017, the
inauguration
of Donald J. Trump, the 45th
president of
the United States, day one of a
new era.
Join "PBS NewsHour" for live
coverage and
analysis you won't find anywhere
else, Friday,
January 20 at 11:00 a.m., 10:00
Central, only
on PBS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
entirely new
level of gridlock in New York
City surrounding
Trump Tower; and the importance
of treating
health problems over long
periods of time.
But first: the hunt to create
fusion energy.
While many people remain worried
about pursuing
further development of nuclear
power, some
researchers believe nuclear
fusion could hold
the key to clean and plentiful
energy.
There have been many false
starts before,
but some scientists see real
reason for hope
that this path will eventually
pay off.
Miles O'Brien has a report for
our weekly
segment The Leading Edge, a
co-production
in this case with "NOVA" and his
special "The
Nuclear Option."
MILES O'BRIEN: In Southern
California, this
complex, power-hungry machine is
hard at work
on a seemingly quixotic mission,
akin to catching
lightning in a bottle.
It is a plasma generator.
Its builders hope it's a key
step in the long
journey to the Holy Grail of
energy production:
fusion.
MICHL BINDERBAUER, CTO, Tri
Alpha Energy:
Fusion is nature's preferred way
of making
power.
MILES O'BRIEN: Michl Binderbauer
is chief
technology officer for a startup
called Tri
Alpha Energy that is making a
$500 million
bet on fusion.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: Think of this
like a mini-sun,
a very hot mini-sun, and it
radiates.
And it's that radiation that is
intercepted
on the surface of the machine,
and then it
becomes heat, and then you can
process that
into electricity.
MILES O'BRIEN: The promise, no
less than limitless
power, with virtually no
greenhouse gases
or radioactive waste.
If that sounds too good to be
true, it is.
No one knows that better than
nuclear engineer
Steve Dean.
STEVE DEAN, Fusion Power
Associates: Fusion
is not low-tech.
It's not going to be easy to
prove that it's
reliable, maintainable,
cost-effective, because
it is complicated.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dean is president
of Fusion
Power Associates, a foundation
focused on
research and education.
He joined the fusion industry in
1962, working
for the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission, which
coordinated and funded the U.S.
fusion effort.
STEVE DEAN: To me, it seemed
like it was something
I could spend my career on, and
we would have
electricity on the grid by the
time I retired.
(LAUGHTER)
STEVE DEAN: That's what I
thought.
So, it didn't happen that way.
MILES O'BRIEN: Fusion is as old
as the cosmos.
It is the nuclear reaction that
takes place
in our sun and all the other
stars in the
universe.
In a fusion reaction, hydrogen
atoms collide
at high speed, fusing together,
forming a
helium atom, releasing one
neutron.
Since the mass of the helium
atom is less
than the combined mass of the
two atoms that
collided in the first place,
energy is released.
The dawn of manmade fusion broke
over the
Pacific in 1952, with the first
explosion
of a hydrogen bomb.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: The hydrogen
bomb was a
quick success.
And so a derivative of that was
euphoria.
In a few more years, we could do
civilian
energy production out of fusion.
And while there were glimmers of
hope along
the way, we all now know,
painfully, that
hasn't happened.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the 1950s and
'60s, researchers
looked for ways to control,
confine and sustain
fusion so that it could be used
as an energy
source.
They tried newly invented
lasers, a U.S. design
called stellarator, and then a
Russian design
called tokamak, a big circular
racetrack that
uses powerful electromagnets to
suspend and
accelerate particles, prompting
fusion-generating
collisions.
Over the years, they have
gradually answered
many of the questions.
STEVE DEAN: Right now, there are
still physics
issues that have to be proven,
but the physics
is very well-known.
The only thing that isn't known
is, when you
do something that's a little bit
more closer
to a power plant, whether
something new will
show up in the physics.
You can't really predict that.
MILES O'BRIEN: That's what this
huge project
is all about.
It is the biggest tokamak ever
designed, under
construction in France, the
International
Thermonuclear Experimental
Reactor, or ITER,
a joint project of 35 nations,
including the
U.S.,
It is the first engineering test
of a fusion
power plant.
ITER is a $14 billion endeavor
that is six
years late and $10 billion over
budget.
It is designed to one day use 50
megawatts
of electricity to generate 500
megawatts for
15 minutes.
STEVE DEAN: At some point, in
order to get
to a power plant, you have to
build what we
call an engineering test
reactor, or something
that really works, that's
putting out lots
of fusion energy and has a lot
of the engineering
that's needed for a power plant.
And ITER and the tokamak are the
-- is the
only track that's at that stage.
MAN: Three, two, one, zero.
MILES O'BRIEN: But there is a
lot of fusion
progress on a smaller scale.
Teams in Germany, China and
South Korea have
recently reported longer,
sustained fusion
reactions than ever before.
Tri Alpha is the largest of
about a dozen
startups trying to make it work.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: We partner up
with some
of the best and brightest in the
field.
MILES O'BRIEN: Michl Binderbauer
began his
work in academia, but believes
the private
sector might have a better
chance of success.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: It made us
lean.
It made us focused.
It made us an organization that
was nimble
to react to small changes
quickly and think
on our feet very quickly.
And I would attribute part of
our success
to exactly that.
STEVE DEAN: And they're also
building on many
more years of physics
understanding and progress.
And so they can be smarter now,
whereas, in
the past, a lot of times, their
ideas were
interesting, but there wasn't
any physics
basis for having confidence.
MILES O'BRIEN: The fundamental
fusion problem
is, it is not easy to get nuclei
to collide
and fuse.
They are all positively charged,
so they naturally
repel each other, like two
magnets.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: So, we use
magnetic fields
to provide that magnetic bottle,
if you will,
into which you put the charged
clouds of particles.
The gas wants to escape and
distribute out,
and we're holding that in with
magnetic force.
This is not like how it's done
in the sun,
where you have massive gravity,
it does the
same job.
So, here, it's all
electromagnetic fields.
MILES O'BRIEN: It takes a lot of
energy to
create those magnetic fields.
In fact, the real challenge in
fusion is creating
plasma that generates more
energy than it
takes to make it in the first
place.
Historically, scientists have
opted to go
big, like ITER.
STEVE DEAN: One event makes a
very small amount
of practical energy.
You have to have billions of
these events.
That means you have lots of
things -- these
things happening in a large
volume.
MILES O'BRIEN: Tri Alpha is
taking a different
approach that wouldn't require
such a huge
structure.
The idea is to fire two
football-shaped plasma
clouds at each other at
supersonic speeds.
At the center of the chamber,
they collide
violently, fusing into a larger
football.
Additional particles are fired
at right angles,
making the plasma ball spin like
a well-thrown
pass.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: The particles
always come
in like this, and they go into
the rotation
of the main object.
So, it feeds in like this to
maintain that
rotation rate.
MILES O'BRIEN: The rotation
suspends the plasma
in place.
They are testing constantly,
sometimes 50
times a day.
Each shot requires about 20
megawatts of electricity,
enough to power all the lights
and appliances
in 5,000 homes, but for only a
few-thousandths-of-a-second.
Gleaning data from a hot ball of
nothing that
lasts for much, much less than
the blink of
an eye requires a lot of clever
testing tools.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: Ultimately,
physics is
an experimental science, right?
And, as such, it relies on
hard-core evidence
coming out of an experiment.
At the stage where we are at, we
are dabbling
a fine line between learning
what works and
tweaking that and advancing it
another step.
MILES O'BRIEN: Binderbauer
believes a commercial
fusion system will be available
in a decade.
MICHL BINDERBAUER: Our
great-great-great-grandkids
are going to live in a world
powered by fusion
almost exclusively.
MILES O'BRIEN: But industry
graybeards like
Steve Dean are less willing to
make such predictions.
After all, fusion energy has
remained decades
away for many decades.
Is it inevitable, in your view?
STEVE DEAN: Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: Just a matter of
time?
STEVE DEAN: I think it's just a
matter of
time.
I used to say, in my lifetime.
Then I started saying in my
children.
And now I think, before it's of
wide-scale
use, it being at least my
grandchildren.
(LAUGHTER)
STEVE DEAN: I can't predict.
MILES O'BRIEN: Right now, we do
not have an
energy crisis to spur the
effort, but we do
have a climate crisis.
Fusion remains an alluring, yet
still elusive
way to power the planet the same
way nature
does.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Foothill
Ranch, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With just a
couple days left
until the inauguration, much of
the nation's
attention is on president-elect
Trump's move
into the White House.
But Midtown Manhattan residents
are still
focusing on the gold skyscraper
of Trump Tower,
which will continue to be a home
for the Trump
family.
Producer Rhana Natour looks at
the unprecedented
challenges of securing that
residence and
the financial fallout.
RHANA NATOUR: This is the new
reality along
the storied Fifth Avenue in
Midtown Manhattan,
dogs, chains, and intense
security.
The president-elect has used
Trump Tower as
a base for transition meetings
since the election,
and while he will relocate to
the White House
after the inaugural, his wife,
Melania, and
10-year-old son Barron plan to
stay in Trump
Tower through the end of the
school year.
Evy Poumpouras is a former
Secret Service
agent.
For 12 years, she was part of
the presidential
detail for Presidents Obama,
Clinton and both
Bushes.
We are seeing delivery truck
after delivery
truck being searched in and out.
What is happening here?
EVY POUMPOURAS, Former U.S.
Secret Service
Agent: So, we want to control
what's coming
into the area of Trump Tower.
And one of the biggest issues
are large vehicles
that can actually have large
amounts of an
explosive.
And a truck would be a perfect
thing, a perfect
IED, a vehicle device, to use.
So, what they will do is, you
will typically
have the vehicle stopped.
They will search the vehicle,
make sure there's
nothing inside the vehicle,
underneath the
vehicle, make sure it's clean.
RHANA NATOUR: Trump Tower
stretches 57 stories,
with 26 floors of offices, three
retail stores
and hundreds of tenants.
It is also surrounded by other
skyscrapers,
compounding the security
challenge.
EVY POUMPOURAS: Right now,
planes aren't allowed
to fly over Trump Tower, same
thing that happens
over at the White House.
But then you have that variable.
He's up top.
He's high on the floor.
Planes are a concern.
RHANA NATOUR: And, as technology
evolves,
there are ever greater risks.
EVY POUMPOURAS: Drones.
Can somebody use a drone, not
just to go up
there and, you know what, I want
to see the
future president?
You can actually strap
explosives, weapons
to those drones, fly them up,
and then cause
harm in that way.
And then also even
cyber-security, radiation,
contamination in the air,
chemical -- any
type of chemical airborne
attack, that's also
an issue.
The tower itself, one of the
things we look
at is what we call the HVAC
system, which
is where the air intake system
is.
That's super dangerous as well.
RHANA NATOUR: While the Secret
Service is
working on threats from within
the tower,
the New York Police Department
guards the
exterior and directs traffic in
the four-block
radius where the vehicles are
being limited.
The protective measures are
causing a dramatic
slowdown in business here, where
the rents
are among the highest in the
world.
Tiffany and Company reporting
this week that
its Fifth Avenue store dropped
14 percent
at the end of 2016, in part due
to the traffic
disruption.
Robert Smith runs operations for
Uncle Jack's
Steakhouse, which has developed
a faithful
following for years on West 56th
Street, within
view of Trump Tower.
The owner was so excited by the
Trump win
that he named menu items after
him.
ROBERT SMITH, Uncle Jack's
Steakhouse: We
were down 20 percent right off
the bat, right
after the election.
Once the security came in,
barricades went
up.
People weren't allowed to walk
into the restaurant
or even near the block.
RHANA NATOUR: What have you been
hearing from
your regular customers?
ROBERT SMITH: Obviously, my
regular clientele
isn't coming in as often as they
used to.
I had bar clientele at lunch
that would come
every day, but that don't.
We have a lot of tourists that
come, very
tourist-central-located
neighborhood.
And a lot of them don't even
want to get anywhere
near barricades and dogs and
giant police
bomb trucks.
And it doesn't make anybody want
to come near
the place.
RHANA NATOUR: A short distance
away, on Sixth
Avenue, Jimmie Tarzy at Allen M.
Jewelers
says he has been losing 30 to 50
percent on
any given week.
He worries about what will
happen to business
if Trump returns to his
penthouse residence
each weekend.
JIMMY TARZY, Allen M. Jewelers:
You have to
take precautionary measures.
And I can understand that.
I really do.
But being the president, or
president-elect,
you have to say to yourself,
you're supposed
to do for the people.
Go live in Washington.
RHANA NATOUR: Some are calling
Trump Tower
White House North.
Exactly how security will be
transformed here
is still a work in progress.
At a New York City Council
meeting last week,
questions on how to prepare and
who should
pay went unanswered by NYPD
officials.
MAN: Does the Secret Service
have the right
to close down a street on its
own?
MAN: I'm not sure.
MAN: If the NYPD were to decline
to provide
service in and around Trump
Tower because
of cost or lack of reimbursement
or whatever,
what would happen then?
MAN: I'm unable to answer that
question.
WOMAN: We have to have some idea
of how much
is it going to cost, because,
right now, we
are just spending with an
unlimited credit,
really, and hoping that maybe
the federal
government will pay, maybe not.
RHANA NATOUR: The NYPD estimates
that, for
every day the president resides
in Trump Tower,
it costs the city $500,000.
So far, Congress has agreed to
reimburse New
York City $7 million for the
cost of providing
NYPD security to Trump Tower and
the surrounding
area.
This is far less, however, than
the $35 million
the city initially requested.
Councilman Dan Garodnick, who
represents the
Trump Tower neighborhood,
objects.
DAN GARODNICK, New York City
Councilman: Why
is New York City bearing the
cost of security
for the president-elect?
We have some very significant
businesses on
Fifth Avenue that employ
hundreds of New Yorkers
each.
And we want to make sure that
these jobs and
these businesses do not become a
casualty
of the Trump presidency here.
RHANA NATOUR: It's a balancing
act between
keeping the legendary business
district humming
and protecting the first family
living at
the heart of it.
In New York City, I'm Rhana
Natour for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a conversation
about changing the way we think
about health
care.
In an article in the latest
issue of "The
New Yorker," Dr. Atul Gawande, a
surgeon and
author, makes the case for the
value of what
he calls incremental medicine to
deal with
chronic conditions.
It's the kind of medicine less
heralded than
that using heroic measures.
William Brangham spoke with Dr.
Gawande recently
and asked him how health care is
changing.
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE, "The New Yorker":
When you think
about the future of health care
and where
we're going at this moment of
debate, there's
a transformation going on that
involves a
recognition that our focus in
medicine has
been on heroic interventions,
like the kind
that I do now as a surgeon.
But the biggest gains are coming
right now
from incremental medicine, from
a commitment
to the kind of steady, overtime
management
of complex problems like chronic
illnesses
that can add years to people's
lives.
But that's work done by some of
the people
with the least resources in our
health care
system.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, who
practices incremental
medicine in our health care
system today?
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: Well, good
examples, just look
at the list of who the
lowest-paid people
are.
Pediatricians are at the bottom.
You would also look at
internists.
You would look at psychiatrists.
You would look at family
physicians, HIV specialists.
People who take care of chronic
illnesses
by seeing people carefully over
time, those
are the people who get the least
money.
The people who have the most are
people like
orthopedic surgeons,
interventional cardiologists.
And my point isn't that -- you
know, that
we're -- that there is something
wrong with
heroism.
My own son has a congenital
heart condition,
where his life was saved by a
cardiac surgeon
stepping in at 11 days of life
to save his
life.
But he is now 21 years old
because of constant
monitoring and working with him
with a primary
care physician and people who
controlled his
blood pressure, recognized
problems before
they arose, dealt with learning
issues that
were related to his condition.
And that's the only reason now
that he's getting
to live a long and healthy life.
That's what we're not rewarding.
They don't have the kind of
resources and
commitment that we are giving to
people like
me.
I have millions of dollars of
equipment available
to me when I go to work every
day in an operating
room.
The clinicians who keep my son
going are lucky
if they can have a nurse.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if that
care is so valuable,
why are the incentives seemingly
going in
the opposite direction?
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: It's mainly
because our health
system was built at a time when
we couldn't
really do this kind of work.
Go back to the '30s, '40s, '50s,
and it was
the discovery of heroic
interventions, the
ability to cure people with
penicillin or
do an operation to stop disease
that was what
saved the day.
Primary care physicians couldn't
do all that
much that really demonstrated a
difference.
Now we have had the data to
track people for
a long time, the computational
power that
recognized, you know what, high
blood pressure,
which we didn't even know was a
huge problem,
we discovered that it afflicts a
third of
all Americans, and it's our
biggest killer,
that years down in the future,
that that is
our cause of everything from not
only heart
disease, but dementia and of
kidney disease.
So, you know, the people who
control and work
with you to control your blood
pressure, they're
not rewarded for doing that or
to be innovative
about doing that.
So, the result is half of
Americans have uncontrolled
high blood pressure, despite
seeing clinicians.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Affordable
Care Act
tried to move the needle in this
direction,
to put more incentives towards
the exact kind
of care that you're talking
about.
How successful has that been,
that effort
been?
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: Here's what I
would describe
it as.
We now have 30 percent, for
example, of Medicare
patients who are seeing doctors
who are rewarded
for doing this kind of work,
which is a dramatic
change from six or seven years
ago.
So, the Affordable Care Act has
pushed this
direction down the road.
It has also offered protections
that allow
for preexisting conditions, as
people know,
that if you have preexisting
conditions like
my son does, that you're
provided coverage
and you can maintain steady
coverage.
And that's an important part of
being able
to stay in care and do better
over the long
run.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, do you
think -- if the
Republicans and president-elect
Trump go forward
and repeal this, do you think
that some of
these incentives will stay in
it?
Or what do you fear coming down
the road?
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: My biggest fear --
so, first
of all, where we are right now,
27 percent
of Americans under 65 have an
existing health
condition that, without the
protections of
the ACA, would mean they would
-- could be
automatically excluded from
insurance coverage.
Before the ACA, they wouldn't
have been able
to get insurance coverage on the
individual
market, you know, if you're a
freelancer or
if you had a small business or
the like.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because of
preexisting conditions?
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: Now that --
because of preexisting
conditions.
So, the first thing is that the
ACA protections
have to be preserved, or those
people get
pitched out.
But the big thing that's
happened is, in the
time since the ACA has been
going on, our
medical science has been
advancing.
We have now genomic data.
We have the power of big data
about what your
living patterns are, what's
happening in your
body.
Even your smartphone can collect
data about
your walking or your pulse or
other things
that could be incredibly
meaningful in being
able to predict whether you have
disease coming
in the future and help avert
those problems.
That is the transformation
that's coming.
But one of the consequences of
if the ACA
is repealed, is that all of us
now are at
risk of being a preexisting --
of having a
preexisting condition waiting to
happen.
Life, increasingly, is a
preexisting condition
waiting to happen, now that we
have more and
more of this data available.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Dr.
Atul Gawande
of "The New Yorker" magazine,
thank you so
much.
DR.
ATUL GAWANDE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: As many as 200,000 people
are expected
to attend the Women's March on
Washington
the day after president-elect
Donald Trump
takes the oath of office.
Organizers say it's a
nonpartisan event aimed
at a specific policy agenda.
We delve into the issues driving
the movement.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Charlie Rose,"
Charlie sits
down with House Speaker Paul
Ryan.
And, finally, a member of the
"NewsHour" family
has died.
Filmmaker and cameraman John
Knoop passed
away last week in El Cerrito,
California.
In the 1990s, working with
correspondent Elizabeth
Farnsworth, he helped produce
and shoot more
than 30 documentary reports for
"The MacNeil/Lehrer
NewsHour" in Cambodia, Peru and
Haiti, among
other countries.
John Knoop was 77 years old.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, a Making Sense
report about what
life is like for middle-income
people on the
edge of financial ruin, and
their efforts
to grapple with it.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.